Title: Protecting Health Care for All Patients Act of 2023 (H.R.485, 118th Congress)
 Type: bill
 Category: healthcare
 Date: February 7, 2024 (passed House; text version used is “Referred in Senate” of 02/08/2024)
 Description: Prohibits federal health programs like Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, and Medicare Advantage from using quality‑adjusted life years (QALYs) and similar measures in coverage and payment decisions, and adjusts funding for the Prevention and Public Health Fund.
 Source: U.S. Congress (Congress.gov)
 Source URL: https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/house-bill/485/text 
Full Text:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
 United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. Short title.
This Act may be cited as the “Protecting Health Care for All Patients Act of 2023”.
SEC. 2. Prohibiting the use of quality-adjusted life years and similar measures in coverage and payment determinations under Federal health care programs.
(a) In general.—Section 1182(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320e–1(e)) is amended—
(1) by inserting “or treats extending the life of an elderly, disabled, or terminally ill individual as of lower value than extending the life of an individual who is younger, non-disabled, or not terminally ill” after “because of an individual’s disability”;
(2) by inserting “described in the preceding sentence” after “such a similar measure”;
(3) by striking “The Secretary shall not” and inserting “A Federal agency (including the CMI (as described in section 1115A)) or State may not”;
(4) by striking “under title XVIII.” and inserting the following: “under any Federal health care program (as defined in section 1128B, except that such term shall include the health program established under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code).”; and
(5) by adding at the end the following new sentence: “Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a Federal agency (including the CMI) or State may not waive the application of the provisions of this subsection (or the provisions of section 1852(o), section 1860D–12(h), section 1902(a)(88), section 1932(b)(9), or section 2102(e)) under section 1115, section 1115A, or any other demonstration or waiver authority.”.
(b) Conforming amendments.—
(1) MEDICAID.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is amended—
(i) in paragraph (86), by striking “and” at the end;
(ii) in paragraph (87)(D), by striking the period and inserting “; and”; and
(iii) by inserting after paragraph (87) the following new paragraph:
“(88) provide for compliance with the requirements of section 1182(e) (relating to prohibiting the use of certain measures in coverage determinations, reimbursement, and incentive programs).”.
(B) MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS.—Section 1932(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u–2(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
“(9) PROHIBITION ON USE OF QUALITY-ADJUSTED LIFE YEARS.—The provisions of section 1182(e) shall apply to the utilization of a dollars-per-quality adjusted life year or similar measure (as described in such section) by a medicaid managed care organization under this title (or a prepaid inpatient health plan or prepaid ambulatory health plan, as defined in section 438.2 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), under a contract with the State) in the same manner as such provisions apply to the utilization of such a year or measure by a State under this title.”.
(2) CHIP.—Section 2102 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397bb) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
“(e) Prohibition on the use of quality-Adjusted life years and similar measures.—A State child health plan shall provide for compliance with the requirements of section 1182(e) (relating to prohibiting the use of certain measures in coverage determinations, reimbursement, and incentive programs).”.
(3) MEDICARE ADVANTAGE.—Section 1852 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–22) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
“(o) Prohibition on use of quality-adjusted life years.—The provisions of section 1182(e) shall apply to the utilization of a dollars-per-quality adjusted life year or similar measure (as described in such section) by an MA plan in the same manner as such provisions apply to the utilization of such a year or measure by the Secretary under this title.”.
(4) MEDICARE PART D.—Section 1860D–12 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w–112) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
“(h) Prohibition on use of quality-adjusted life years.—The provisions of section 1182(e) shall apply to the utilization of a dollars-per-quality adjusted life year or similar measure (as described in such section) by a prescription drug plan in the same manner as such provisions apply to the utilization of such a year or measure by the Secretary under this title.”.
(c) Implementation.—The amendments made by this section shall apply beginning on January 1, 2025.
SEC. 3. Prevention and Public Health Fund.
Section 4002(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 300u–11) is amended by striking paragraphs (7), (8), and (9) and inserting the following:
“(7) for each of fiscal years 2024 and 2025, $1,102,000,000;
“(8) for each of fiscal years 2026 and 2027, $1,327,000,000;
“(9) for each of fiscal years 2028 and 2029, $1,526,000,000; and”.
SEC. 4. Report.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report on how quality-adjusted life years negatively impacts individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their access to care.
Passed the House of Representatives February 7, 2024.
 Attest:
 KEVIN F. MCCUMBER, Clerk.

Title: Future of Artificial Intelligence Innovation Act of 2024 (S.4178, 118th Congress)
 Type: bill
 Category: technology
 Date: December 18, 2024 (reported to Senate with amendment; introduced April 18, 2024)
 Description: Establishes an AI Safety Institute at NIST, creates AI testbeds and evaluation programs, and promotes voluntary AI standards, research, and international cooperation to support safe innovation and competitiveness.
 Source: U.S. Congress (Congress.gov)
 Source URL: https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/4178/text 
Full Text (opening and core structure; remainder continues at source URL):
Calendar No. 725
 118th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 4178
To establish artificial intelligence standards, metrics, and evaluation tools, to support artificial intelligence research, development, and capacity building activities, to promote innovation in the artificial intelligence industry by ensuring companies of all sizes can succeed and thrive, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
 April 18, 2024
Ms. Cantwell (for herself, Mr. Young, Mr. Hickenlooper, Mrs. Blackburn, Mr. Wicker, Mr. Luján, Ms. Sinema, Mr. Rounds, and Mr. Schumer) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
December 18 (legislative day, December 16), 2024
 Reported by Ms. Cantwell, with an amendment
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed in italic]
A BILL
To establish artificial intelligence standards, metrics, and evaluation tools, to support artificial intelligence research, development, and capacity building activities, to promote innovation in the artificial intelligence industry by ensuring companies of all sizes can succeed and thrive, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
 United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. Short title; table of contents.
(a) Short title.—This Act may be cited as the “Future of Artificial Intelligence Innovation Act of 2024”.
(b) Table of contents.—The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 Sec. 2. Sense of Congress.
 Sec. 3. Definitions.
TITLE I—VOLUNTARY ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STANDARDS, METRICS, EVALUATION TOOLS, TESTBEDS, AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
Subtitle A—Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute and testbeds
 Sec. 101. Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute.
 Sec. 102. Program on artificial intelligence testbeds.
 Sec. 103. National Institute of Standards and Technology and Department of Energy testbed to identify, test, and synthesize new materials.
 Sec. 104. National Science Foundation and Department of Energy collaboration to make scientific discoveries through the use of artificial intelligence.
 Sec. 105. Progress report.
Subtitle B—International cooperation
 Sec. 111. International coalition on innovation, development, and harmonization of standards with respect to artificial intelligence.
 Sec. 112. Requirement to support bilateral and multilateral artificial intelligence research collaborations.
Subtitle C—Identifying regulatory barriers to innovation
 Sec. 121. Comptroller General of the United States identification of risks and obstacles relating to artificial intelligence and Federal agencies.
TITLE II—ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, CAPACITY BUILDING ACTIVITIES
 Sec. 201. Public data for artificial intelligence systems.
 Sec. 202. Federal grand challenges in artificial intelligence.
SEC. 2. Sense of Congress.
It is the sense of Congress that policies governing artificial intelligence should maximize the potential and development of artificial intelligence to benefit all private and public stakeholders.
SEC. 3. Definitions.
In this Act:
(1) AGENCY.—The term “agency” has the meaning given such term in section 3502 of title 44, United States Code, except such term shall include an independent regulatory agency, as defined in such section.
(2) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The term “artificial intelligence” has the meaning given such term in section 5002 of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 (15 U.S.C. 9401).
(3) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE BLUE-TEAMING.—The term “artificial intelligence blue-teaming” means an effort to conduct operational network vulnerability evaluations and provide mitigation techniques to entities who have a need for an independent technical review of the network security posture of an artificial intelligence system.
(4) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MODEL.—The term “artificial intelligence model” means a component of an artificial intelligence system that is a model—
(A) derived using mathematical, computational, statistical, or machine-learning techniques; and
 (B) used as part of an artificial intelligence system to produce outputs from a given set of inputs.
(5) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RED-TEAMING.—The term “artificial intelligence red-teaming” means structured adversarial testing efforts of an artificial intelligence system to identify risks, flaws, and vulnerabilities of the artificial intelligence system, such as harmful outputs from the system, unforeseen or undesirable system behaviors, limitations, or potential risks associated with the misuse of the system.
(6) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK.—The term “Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework” means the most recently updated version of the framework developed and updated pursuant to section 22A(c) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 278h–1(c)).
(7) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEM.—The term “artificial intelligence system” has the meaning given such term in section 7223 of the Advancing American AI Act (40 U.S.C. 11301 note).
(8) CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE.—The term “critical infrastructure” has the meaning given such term in section 1016(e) of the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT ACT) Act of 2001 (42 U.S.C. 5195c(e)).
(9) FEDERAL LABORATORY.—The term “Federal laboratory” has the meaning given such term in section 4 of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3703).
(10) FOUNDATION MODEL.—The term “foundation model” means an artificial intelligence model trained on broad data at scale and is adaptable to a wide range of downstream tasks.
(11) GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The term “generative artificial intelligence” means the class of artificial intelligence models that utilize the structure and characteristics of input data in order to generate outputs in the form of derived synthetic content. Such derived synthetic content can include images, videos, audio, text, software, code, and other digital content.
(12) NATIONAL LABORATORY.—The term “National Laboratory” has the meaning given such term in section 2 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 15801).
(13) SYNTHETIC CONTENT.—The term “synthetic content” means information, such as images, videos, audio clips, and text, that has been significantly modified or generated by algorithms, including by artificial intelligence.
(14) TESTBED.—The term “testbed” means a facility or mechanism equipped for conducting rigorous, transparent, and replicable testing of tools and technologies, including artificial intelligence systems, to help evaluate the functionality, trustworthiness, usability, and performance of those tools or technologies.
(15) TEVV.—The term “TEVV” means methodologies, metrics, techniques, and tasks for testing, evaluating, verifying, and validating artificial intelligence systems or components.
(16) WATERMARKING.—The term “watermarking” means the act of embedding information that is intended to be difficult to remove, into outputs generated by artificial intelligence, including outputs such as text, images, audio, videos, software code, or any other digital content or data, for the purposes of verifying the authenticity of the output or the identity or characteristics of its provenance, modifications, or conveyance.
SEC. 101. Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute.
(a) Establishment of Institute.—
 (1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology (in this section referred to as the “Under Secretary”) shall establish an institute on artificial intelligence.
 (2) DESIGNATION.—The institute established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be known as the “Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute” (in this section referred to as the “Institute”).
 (3) MISSION.—The mission of the Institute is as follows:
 (A) To assist the private sector and agencies in developing voluntary best practices for the robust assessment of artificial intelligence systems.
 (B) To provide technical assistance for the adoption and use of artificial intelligence across the Federal Government to improve the quality of government services.
 (C) To develop guidelines, methodologies, and best practices to promote—
 (i) development and adoption of voluntary, consensus-based technical standards or industry standards;
 (ii) long-term advancements in artificial intelligence technologies; and
 (iii) innovation in the artificial intelligence industry by ensuring that companies of all sizes can succeed and thrive.
[…text continues in detail through Sections 101–104, 111–121, 201–202 at the source URL above…]

Title: Executive Order 14162 – Putting America First in International Environmental Agreements
 Type: executive_order
 Category: environment
 Date: January 20, 2025
 Description: Directs the United States to withdraw from the Paris Agreement and related international climate commitments, halt associated climate finance, and reorient international environmental engagement toward domestic economic and energy priorities.
 Source: White House / Federal Register (Presidential Documents)
 Source URL: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2025/01/20/2025-02010/executive-order-14162-putting-america-first-in-international-environmental-agreements 
Full Text:
Putting America First in International Environmental Agreements
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1 . Purpose. The United States must grow its economy and maintain jobs for its citizens while playing a leadership role in global efforts to protect the environment. Over decades, with the help of sensible policies that do not encumber private-sector activity, the United States has simultaneously grown its economy, raised worker wages, increased energy production, reduced air and water pollution, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. The United States' successful track record of advancing both economic and environmental objectives should be a model for other countries.
In recent years, the United States has purported to join international agreements and initiatives that do not reflect our country's values or our contributions to the pursuit of economic and environmental objectives. Moreover, these agreements steer American taxpayer dollars to countries that do not require, or merit, financial assistance in the interests of the American people.
Sec. 2 . Policy. It is the policy of my Administration to put the interests of the United States and the American people first in the development and negotiation of any international agreements with the potential to damage or stifle the American economy. These agreements must not unduly or unfairly burden the United States.
Sec. 3 . Implementation. (a) The United States Ambassador to the United Nations shall immediately submit formal written notification of the United States' withdrawal from the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The notice shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Depositary of the Agreement, attached as Appendix A. The United States will consider its withdrawal from the Agreement and any attendant obligations to be effective immediately upon this provision of notification.
(b) The United States Ambassador to the United Nations shall immediately submit written formal notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any relevant party, of the United States' withdrawal from any agreement, pact, accord, or similar commitment made under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
(c) The United States Ambassador to the United Nations, in collaboration with the Secretary of State and Secretary of the Treasury, shall immediately cease or revoke any purported financial commitment made by the United States under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
(d) Immediately upon completion of the tasks listed in subsections (a), (b), and (c), the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, in collaboration with the Secretary of State and Secretary of the Treasury shall certify a report to the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs that describes in detail any further action required to achieve the policy objectives set forth in section 2 of this order.
(e) The U.S. International Climate Finance Plan is revoked and rescinded immediately. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, within 10 days of this order, issue guidance for the rescission of all frozen funds.
(f) Within 30 days of this order, the Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Health and Human Services, Secretary of Energy, Secretary of Agriculture, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator of the U.S. Agency for International Development, Chief Executive Officer of the International Development Finance Corporation, Chief Executive Officer of the Millennium Challenge Corporation, Director of the U.S. Trade and Development Agency, President of the Export-Import Bank, and head of any other relevant department or agency shall submit a report to the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs that details their actions to revoke or rescind policies that were implemented to advance the International Climate Finance Plan.
(g) The Secretary of State, Secretary of Commerce, and the head of any department or agency that plans or coordinates international energy agreements shall henceforth prioritize economic efficiency, the promotion of American prosperity, consumer choice, and fiscal restraint in all foreign engagements that concern energy policy.
Sec. 4 . General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) the authority granted by law to an executive department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented in a manner consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or any other persons.

Title: Executive Order 14248 – Preserving and Protecting the Integrity of American Elections
 Type: executive_order
 Category: civil_rights (voting) / immigration
 Date: March 25, 2025
 Description: Requires documentary proof of U.S. citizenship for voter registration, restricts acceptable IDs, and directs federal agencies to provide states with access to federal databases to verify voter eligibility and enforce prohibitions on noncitizen voting.
 Source: White House / Federal Register (Presidential Documents)
 Source URL: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2025/03/28/2025-05523/preserving-and-protecting-the-integrity-of-american-elections
Full Text:
Preserving and Protecting the Integrity of American Elections
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered:
Section 1 . Purpose and Policy. Despite pioneering self-government, the United States now fails to enforce basic and necessary election protections employed by modern, developed nations, as well as those still developing. India and Brazil, for example, are tying voter identification to a biometric database, while the United States largely relies on self-attestation for citizenship. In tabulating votes, Germany and Canada require use of paper ballots, counted in public by local officials, which substantially reduces the number of disputes as compared to the American patchwork of voting methods that can lead to basic chain-of-custody problems. Further, while countries like Denmark and Sweden sensibly limit mail-in voting to those unable to vote in person and do not count late-arriving votes regardless of the date of postmark, many American elections now feature mass voting by mail, with many officials accepting ballots without postmarks or those received well after Election Day.
Free, fair, and honest elections unmarred by fraud, errors, or suspicion are fundamental to maintaining our constitutional Republic. The right of American citizens to have their votes properly counted and tabulated, without illegal dilution, is vital to determining the rightful winner of an election.
Under the Constitution, State governments must safeguard American elections in compliance with Federal laws that protect Americans' voting rights and guard against dilution by illegal voting, discrimination, fraud, and other forms of malfeasance and error. Yet the United States has not adequately enforced Federal election requirements that, for example, prohibit States from counting ballots received after Election Day or prohibit non-citizens from registering to vote.
Federal law establishes a uniform Election Day across the Nation for Federal elections, 2 U.S.C. 7 and 3 U.S.C. 1. It is the policy of my Administration to enforce those statutes and require that votes be cast and received by the election date established in law. As the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit recently held in Republican National Committee v. Wetzel (2024), those statutes set “the day by which ballots must be both cast by voters and received by state officials.” Yet numerous States fail to comply with those laws by counting ballots received after Election Day. This is like allowing persons who arrive 3 days after Election Day, perhaps after a winner has been declared, to vote in person at a former voting precinct, which would be absurd. Several Federal laws, including 18 U.S.C. 1015 and 611, prohibit foreign nationals from registering to vote or voting in Federal elections. Yet States fail adequately to vet voters' citizenship, and, in recent years, the Department of Justice has failed to prioritize and devote sufficient resources for enforcement of these provisions. Even worse, the prior administration actively prevented States from removing aliens from their voter lists.
Additionally, Federal laws, such as the National Voter Registration Act (Pub. L. 103-31) and the Help America Vote Act (Pub. L. 107-252), require States to maintain an accurate and current Statewide list of every legally registered voter in the State. And the Department of Homeland Security is required to share database information with States upon request so they can fulfill this duty. See 8 U.S.C. 1373(c). Maintaining accurate voter registration lists is a fundamental requirement in protecting voters from having their ballots voided or diluted by fraudulent votes.
Federal law, 52 U.S.C. 30121, prohibits foreign nationals from participating in Federal, State, or local elections by making any contributions or expenditures. But foreign nationals and non-governmental organizations have taken advantage of loopholes in the law's interpretation, spending millions of dollars through conduit contributions and ballot-initiative-related expenditures. This type of foreign interference in our election process undermines the franchise and the right of American citizens to govern their Republic.
Above all, elections must be honest and worthy of the public trust. That requires voting methods that produce a voter-verifiable paper record allowing voters to efficiently check their votes to protect against fraud or mistake. Election-integrity standards must be modified accordingly.
It is the policy of my Administration to enforce Federal law and to protect the integrity of our election process.
Sec. 2 . Enforcing the Citizenship Requirement for Federal Elections. To enforce the Federal prohibition on foreign nationals voting in Federal elections:
(a)(i) Within 30 days of the date of this order, the Election Assistance Commission shall take appropriate action to require, in its national mail voter registration form issued under 52 U.S.C. 20508:
(A) documentary proof of United States citizenship, consistent with 52 U.S.C. 20508(b)(3); and
(B) a State or local official to record on the form the type of document that the applicant presented as documentary proof of United States citizenship, including the date of the document's issuance, the date of the document's expiration (if any), the office that issued the document, and any unique identification number associated with the document as required by the criteria in 52 U.S.C. 21083(a)(5)(A), while taking appropriate measures to ensure information security.
(ii) For purposes of subsection (a) of this section, “documentary proof of United States citizenship” shall include a copy of:
(A) a United States passport;
(B) an identification document compliant with the requirements of the REAL ID Act of 2005 (Pub. L. 109-13, Div. B) that indicates the applicant is a citizen of the United States;
(C) an official military identification card that indicates the applicant is a citizen of the United States; or
(D) a valid Federal or State government-issued photo identification if such identification indicates that the applicant is a United States citizen or if such identification is otherwise accompanied by proof of United States citizenship.
(b) To identify unqualified voters registered in the States:
(i) the Secretary of Homeland Security shall, consistent with applicable law, ensure that State and local officials have, without the requirement of the payment of a fee, access to appropriate systems for verifying the citizenship or immigration status of individuals registering to vote or who are already registered;
(ii) the Secretary of State shall take all lawful and appropriate action to make available information from relevant databases to State and local election officials engaged in verifying the citizenship of individuals registering to vote or who are already registered; and
(iii) the Department of Homeland Security, in coordination with the DOGE Administrator, shall review each State's publicly available voter registration list and available records concerning voter list maintenance activities as required by 52 U.S.C. 20507, alongside Federal immigration databases and State records requested, including through subpoena where necessary and authorized by law, for consistency with Federal requirements.
(c) Within 90 days of the date of this order, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall, consistent with applicable law, provide to the Attorney General complete information on all foreign nationals who have indicated on any immigration form that they have registered or voted in a Federal, State, or local election, and shall also take all appropriate action to submit to relevant State or local election officials such information.
(d) The head of each Federal voter registration executive department or agency (agency) under the National Voter Registration Act, 52 U.S.C. 20506(a), shall assess citizenship prior to providing a Federal voter registration form to enrollees of public assistance programs.
(e) The Attorney General shall prioritize enforcement of 18 U.S.C. 611 and 1015(f) and similar laws that restrict non-citizens from registering to vote or voting, including through use of:
(i) databases or information maintained by the Department of Homeland Security;
(ii) State-issued identification records and driver license databases; and
(iii) similar records relating to citizenship.
(f) The Attorney General shall, consistent with applicable laws, coordinate with State attorneys general to assist with State-level review and prosecution of aliens unlawfully registered to vote or casting votes.
Sec. 3 . Providing Other Assistance to States Verifying Eligibility. To assist States in determining whether individuals are eligible to register and vote:
(a) The Commissioner of Social Security shall take all appropriate action to make available the Social Security Number Verification Service, the Death Master File, and any other Federal databases containing relevant information to all State and local election officials engaged in verifying the eligibility of individuals registering to vote or who are already registered. In determining and taking such action, the Commissioner of Social Security shall ensure compliance with applicable privacy and data security laws and regulations.
(b) The Attorney General shall ensure compliance with the requirements of 52 U.S.C. 20507(g).
(c) The Attorney General shall take appropriate action with respect to States that fail to comply with the list maintenance requirements of the National Voter Registration Act and the Help America Vote Act contained in 52 U.S.C. 20507 and 52 U.S.C. 21083.
(d) The Secretary of Defense shall update the Federal Post Card Application, pursuant to the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act, 52 U.S.C. 20301, to require:
(i) documentary proof of United States citizenship, as defined by section 2(a)(ii) of this order; and
(ii) proof of eligibility to vote in elections in the State in which the voter is attempting to vote.
Sec. 4 . Improving the Election Assistance Commission. (a) The Election Assistance Commission shall, pursuant to 52 U.S.C. 21003(b)(3) and 21142(c) and consistent with applicable law, take all appropriate action to cease providing Federal funds to States that do not comply with the Federal laws set forth in 52 U.S.C. 21145, including the requirement in 52 U.S.C. 20505(a)(1) that States accept and use the national mail voter registration form issued pursuant to 52 U.S.C. 20508(a)(1), including any requirement for documentary proof of United States citizenship adopted pursuant to section 2(a)(ii) of this order.
(b)(i) The Election Assistance Commission shall initiate appropriate action to amend the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines 2.0 and issue other appropriate guidance establishing standards for voting systems to protect election integrity. The amended guidelines and other guidance shall provide that voting systems should not use a ballot in which a vote is contained within a barcode or quick-response code in the vote counting process except where necessary to accommodate individuals with disabilities, and should provide a voter-verifiable paper record to prevent fraud or mistake.
(ii) Within 180 days of the date of this order, the Election Assistance Commission shall take appropriate action to review and, if appropriate, re-certify voting systems under the new standards established under subsection (b)(i) of this section, and to rescind all previous certifications of voting equipment based on prior standards.
(c) Following an audit of Help America Vote Act fund expenditures conducted pursuant to 52 U.S.C. 21142, the Election Assistance Commission shall report any discrepancies or issues with an audited State's certifications of compliance with Federal law to the Department of Justice for appropriate enforcement action.
(d) The Secretary of Homeland Security and the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, consistent with applicable law, shall in considering the provision of funding for State or local election offices or administrators through the Homeland Security Grant Programs, 6 U.S.C. 603 et seq., heavily prioritize compliance with the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines 2.0 developed by the Election Assistance Commission and completion of testing through the Voting System Test Labs accreditation process.
Sec. 5 . Prosecuting Election Crimes. To protect the franchise of American citizens and their right to participate in fair and honest elections:
(a) The Attorney General shall take all appropriate action to enter into information-sharing agreements, to the maximum extent possible, with the chief State election official or multi-member agency of each State. These agreements shall aim to provide the Department of Justice with detailed information on all suspected violations of State and Federal election laws discovered by State officials, including information on individuals who:
(i) registered or voted despite being ineligible or who registered multiple times;
(ii) committed election fraud;
(iii) provided false information on voter registration or other election forms;
(iv) intimidated or threatened voters or election officials; or
(v) otherwise engaged in unlawful conduct to interfere in the election process.
(b) To the extent that any States are unwilling to enter into such an information sharing agreement or refuse to cooperate in investigations and prosecutions of election crimes, the Attorney General shall:
(i) prioritize enforcement of Federal election integrity laws in such States to ensure election integrity given the State's demonstrated unwillingness to enter into an information-sharing agreement or to cooperate in investigations and prosecutions; and
(ii) review for potential withholding of grants and other funds that the Department awards and distributes, in the Department's discretion, to State and local governments for law enforcement and other purposes, as consistent with applicable law.
(c) The Attorney General shall take all appropriate action to align the Department of Justice's litigation positions with the purpose and policy of this order.
Sec. 6 . Improving Security of Voting Systems. To improve the security of all voting equipment and systems used to cast ballots, tabulate votes, and report results:
(a) The Attorney General and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall take all appropriate actions to the extent permitted by 42 U.S.C. 5195c and all other applicable law, so long as the Department of Homeland Security maintains the designation of election infrastructure as critical infrastructure, as defined by 42 U.S.C. 5195c(e), to prevent all non-citizens from being involved in the administration of any Federal election, including by accessing election equipment, ballots, or any other relevant materials used in the conduct of any Federal election.
(b) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall, in coordination with the Election Assistance Commission and to the maximum extent possible, review and report on the security of all electronic systems used in the voter registration and voting process. The Secretary of Homeland Security, as the head of the designated Sector Risk Management Agency under 6 U.S.C. 652a, in coordination with the Election Assistance Commission, shall assess the security of all such systems to the extent they are connected to, or integrated into, the Internet and report on the risk of such systems being compromised through malicious software and unauthorized intrusions into the system.
Sec. 7 . Compliance with Federal Law Setting the National Election Day. To achieve full compliance with the Federal laws that set the uniform day for appointing Presidential electors and electing members of Congress:
(a) The Attorney General shall take all necessary action to enforce 2 U.S.C. 7 and 3 U.S.C. 1 against States that violate these provisions by including absentee or mail-in ballots received after Election Day in the final tabulation of votes for the appointment of Presidential electors and the election of members of the United States Senate and House of Representatives.
(b) Consistent with 52 U.S.C. 21001(b) and other applicable law, the Election Assistance Commission shall condition any available funding to a State on that State's compliance with the requirement in 52 U.S.C. 21081(a)(6) that each State adopt uniform and nondiscriminatory standards within that State that define what constitutes a vote and what will be counted as a vote, including that, as prescribed in 2 U.S.C. 7 and 3 U.S.C. 1, there be a uniform and nondiscriminatory ballot receipt deadline of Election Day for all methods of voting, excluding ballots cast in accordance with 52 U.S.C. 20301 et seq., after which no additional votes may be cast.
Sec. 8 . Preventing Foreign Interference and Unlawful Use of Federal Funds. The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall prioritize enforcement of 52 U.S.C. 30121 and other appropriate laws to prevent foreign nationals from contributing or donating in United States elections. The Attorney General shall likewise prioritize enforcement of 31 U.S.C. 1352, which prohibits lobbying by organizations or entities that have received any Federal funds.
Sec. 9 . Federal Actions to Address Executive Order 14019. The heads of all agencies, and the Election Assistance Commission, shall cease all agency actions implementing Executive Order 14019 of March 7, 2021 (Promoting Access to Voting), which was revoked by Executive Order 14148 of on January 20, 2025 (Initial Rescissions of Harmful Executive Orders and Actions), and, within 90 days of the date of this order, submit to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, a report describing compliance with this order.
Sec. 10 . Severability. If any provision of this order, or the application of any provision to any agency, person, or circumstance, is held to be invalid, the remainder of this order and the application of its provisions to any other agencies, persons, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 11 . General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) the authority granted by law to an executive department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

Title: Executive Order 14115 – Advancing Women’s Health Research and Innovation 
Type: executive_order 
Category: healthcare 
Date: January 25, 2024 
Description: Directs federal agencies to expand, coordinate, and accelerate research on women’s health, including closing long‑standing gaps in medical research, improving data collection, and prioritizing conditions that disproportionately affect women.
Source: White House / Presidential Actions 
Source URL: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2024/01/25/executive-order-on-advancing-womens-health-research-and-innovation/ 
Full Text:
Advancing Women's Health Research and Innovation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1 . Policy. My Administration is committed to getting women the answers they need about their health. For far too long, scientific and biomedical research excluded women and undervalued the study of women's health. The resulting research gaps mean that we know far too little about women's health across women's lifespans, and those gaps are even more prominent for women of color, older women, and women with disabilities.
The notion of including women in clinical trials used to be revolutionary—which means many diagnostics and treatments were developed without women in mind and thus failed to account for women's health. Over 30 years ago, the Congress passed the landmark National Institutes of Health Revitalization Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-43) to direct the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the largest public funder of biomedical research in the world, to include women and people of color in NIH-funded clinical research. In 2016, the Congress built on these requirements in the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law 114-255), which directed the NIH to further its pursuit of women's health research, including by strengthening clinical trial inclusion and data analysis, developing research and data standards to advance the study of women's health, and improving NIH-wide coordination on women's health research.
These policies led to significant increases in women's participation in clinical trials, and ongoing investments in biomedical research have supported breakthroughs in women's health. Through the discovery of genetic factors that increase the risk of breast cancer and innovations in mammography, we have transformed our approach to prevention, early detection, and treatment, and have improved outcomes for women facing a breast cancer diagnosis. We have improved access to life-saving treatments for women with severe heart failure by ensuring that the devices they need are the right size for a woman's body. We have also identified some of the most characteristic symptoms of heart attack in women, which are different from those in men—discoveries that have helped deliver faster treatment to women when every second counts. This is what we can achieve when we invest in women's health research.
It is time, once again, to pioneer the next generation of discoveries in women's health. My Administration seeks to fundamentally change how we approach and fund women's health research in the United States. That is why I established the first-ever White House Initiative on Women's Health Research (Initiative)—which is within the Office of the First Lady and includes a wide array of executive departments and agencies (agencies) and White House offices—to accelerate research that will provide the tools we need to prevent, diagnose, and treat conditions that affect women uniquely, disproportionately, or differently.
Together with the First Lady's tireless efforts, the Initiative is already galvanizing the Federal Government to advance women's health, including through investments in innovation and improved coordination within and across agencies. We are also mobilizing leaders across a wide range of sectors, including industry, philanthropy, and the medical and research communities, to improve women's health.
It is the policy of my Administration to advance women's health research, close health disparities, and ensure that the gains we make in research laboratories are translated into real-world clinical benefits for women. It is also the policy of my Administration to ensure that women have access to high-quality, evidence-based health care and to improve health outcomes for women across their lifespans and throughout the country.
I will continue to call on the Congress to provide the transformative investments necessary to help our researchers and scientists answer today's most pressing questions related to women's health. Investing in innovation in women's health is an investment in the future of American families and the economy. At the same time, agencies must use their existing authorities to advance and integrate women's health across the Federal research portfolio, close research gaps, and make investments that maximize our ability to prevent, diagnose, and treat health conditions in women.
Sec. 2 . Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(a) The term “women's health research” means research aimed at expanding knowledge of women's health across their lifespans, which includes the study and analysis of conditions specific to women, conditions that disproportionately impact women, and conditions that affect women differently.
(b) The term “White House Initiative on Women's Health Research” means the interagency, advisory body established by the Presidential Memorandum of November 13, 2023 (White House Initiative on Women's Health Research), to advance women's health research.
(c) The term “agency Members of the Initiative” refers to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Director of the National Science Foundation.
Sec. 3 . Further Integrating Women's Health Research in Federal Research Programs. (a) Building on research and data standards issued by the NIH in 2016, agency Members of the Initiative shall consider actions to develop or strengthen research and data standards that enhance the study of women's health across all relevant, federally funded research and other Federal funding opportunities. Agency Members of the Initiative shall consider issuing new guidance, application materials, reporting requirements, and research dissemination strategies to advance the study of women's health, including to:
(i) require applicants for Federal research funding, as appropriate, to explain how their proposed study designs will consider and advance our knowledge of women's health, including through the adoption of standard application language;
(ii) consider women's health, as appropriate, during the evaluation of research proposals that address medical conditions that may affect women differently or disproportionately;
(iii) improve accountability for grant recipients, including, as appropriate, by requiring regular reporting on their implementation of, and compliance with, research and data standards related to women's health, including compliance with recruitment milestones; and
(iv) improve the recruitment, enrollment, and retention of women in clinical trials, including, as appropriate, by reducing barriers through technological and data sciences advances.
(b) Within 30 days of the date of this order, the Chair of the Initiative and the Director of the NIH Office of Research on Women's Health, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), shall establish and co-chair a subgroup of the Initiative to promote interagency alignment and consistency in the development of agency research and data standards to enhance the study of women's health.
(c) Within 90 days of the date of this order, agency Members of the Initiative shall report to the Chair of the Initiative on actions taken to strengthen research and data standards to enhance the study and analysis of women's health and related conditions.
(d) Within 180 days of the date of this order and on an annual basis thereafter, agency Members of the Initiative shall report to the President on the status of implementation of research and data standards.
Sec. 4 . Prioritizing Federal Investments in Women's Health Research. (a) Agency Members of the Initiative shall identify and, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, prioritize grantmaking and other awards to advance women's health research, with an emphasis on:
(i) promoting collaborative, interdisciplinary research across fields and areas of expertise;
(ii) addressing health disparities and inequities affecting women, including those related to race, ethnicity, age, socioeconomic status, disability, and exposure to environmental factors and contaminants that can directly affect health; and
(iii) supporting the translation of research advancements into improved health outcomes.
(b) Agency Members of the Initiative shall take steps to promote the availability of federally funded research and other Federal funding opportunities to advance women's health, including through the development and inclusion of standard language related to women's health, as appropriate, in all relevant notices of funding opportunity and through better facilitating potential grant applicants' access to information about funding opportunities related to women's health research.
(c) To advance innovation, commercialization, and risk mitigation, agency Members of the Initiative shall:
(i) identify and, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, seek ways to use innovation funds, challenges, prizes, and other mechanisms to spur innovation in women's health;
(ii) invest in innovation to accelerate women's health research, including through or in collaboration with the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health and the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs;
(iii) support the role of small businesses and entrepreneurs in advancing innovation in women's health research, including through Small Business Innovation Research Programs and Small Business Technology Transfer Programs; and
(iv) invest in translational science to convert research findings and discoveries into treatments and interventions that improve women's health outcomes and reduce health disparities, including through the Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture research programs.
(d) In implementing section 8(b) of Executive Order 14110 of October 30, 2023 (Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence), the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Director of the National Science Foundation, shall consider the opportunities for and challenges that affect women's health research in the responsible deployment and use of artificial intelligence (AI) and AI-enabled technologies in the health and human services sector.
Sec. 5 . Galvanizing Research on Women's Midlife Health. (a) Within 90 days of the date of this order, to address research gaps in understanding women's health and diseases and conditions associated with women's midlife and later years, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall:
(i) launch a comprehensive assessment of the current state of the science on menopause to develop an evidence-based research agenda that will guide Federal and private sector investments in menopause-related research;
(ii) evaluate evidence-based interventions and strategies to improve women's experiences in the menopausal and perimenopausal periods, including the delivery of treatments for women experiencing menopause in clinical care settings;
(iii) consider developing new common data elements and survey tools to expand the ethical and equitable collection of data on issues related to women's midlife health; and
(iv) develop new comprehensive resources to help ensure that the public has evidence-based information about menopause, including menopause-related research initiatives, findings, and symptom-prevention and treatment options.
(b) The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall evaluate the needs of women service members and veterans related to midlife health and shall develop recommendations to support improved treatment and targeted research of midlife health issues, including menopausal symptoms.
Sec. 6 . Assessing Unmet Needs to Support Women's Health Research. The Director of OMB and the Assistant to the President and Director of the Gender Policy Council (Directors) shall lead an effort, in collaboration with the Initiative, to identify current gaps in Federal funding for women's health research and shall submit recommendations to the President describing the additional funding and programming necessary to catalyze research on women's health, including in priority areas within women's health as identified by the Initiative, as follows:
(a) Within 90 days of the date of this order, the Directors shall, in consultation with the Initiative, develop guidance for assessing additional funding that agencies need to close research gaps in women's health.
(b) Within 180 days of the date of this order, Members of the Initiative shall consult the guidance described in subsection (a) of this section and shall each submit a report to the Directors that identifies the funding needed to catalyze research on women's health.
(c) Based on the reports described in subsection (b) of this section, the Directors shall develop and submit recommendations to the President on steps the Federal Government should take to catalyze research on women's health. These recommendations shall identify any statutory, regulatory, budgetary, or other changes that may be necessary to ensure that Federal laws, policies, practices, and programs support women's health research more effectively.
(d) Following the submission of the recommendations described in subsection (c) of this section, each Member of the Initiative shall report annually to the Directors on progress made in response to those recommendations and to improve the study of women's health. The Director of OMB shall provide a summary of Members' progress and any new recommendations to the President on an annual basis, consult with each Member on their women's health research funding needs during the annual budget process, and calculate Federal funding for women's health research on an annual basis.
Sec. 7 . General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) the authority granted by law to an executive department or agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.


